[CI:DOCS] Document building Podman remote on Windows hosts (#17845)
containers/podman: build_windows.md

# Building the Podman client and client installer on Windows

The following describes the process for building the Podman client on Windows.

## OS requirements

> Windows OS can behave very different depending on how it was configured. This documentation assumes that one is using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Windows OS can behave very differently depending on how it was configured. This documentation assumes that one is using
```

> [Windows 11 development machine](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/virtual-machines/) or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a [Windows 11 development machine](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/downloads/virtual-machines/) or a
```

configuration close to this one. It bundles also tools, which are unnecessary for Podman builds, but this

> set of packages is well aligned with Github `windows-latest` offerign. Some of tools would still be missing from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
set of packages is well aligned with GitHub's `windows-latest` offerings. Some of the tools will still be missing from
```

> this distribution and have to be manually added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this distribution and will have to be manually added after the installation completes.
```

## Install Pandoc

> It could be installed from https://pandoc.org/installing.html When performing install one has to choose option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pandoc could be installed from https://pandoc.org/installing.html When performing the Pandoc installation one, has to choose the option
```

"Install for all users" (to put the binaries into "Program Files" directory).

## Install WiX Toolset v3 (is preinstalled in Github runner)

> Latest release can be obtained from https://wixtoolset.org/docs/wix3/ Installing it into clean VM might require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latest release of the WiX Toolset can be obtained from https://wixtoolset.org/docs/wix3/.  Installing it into a clean VM might require
```

> additional install of .NET Framework 3.5 in advance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an additional installation of .NET Framework 3.5 in advance
```

> ([instructions how to add it via enabling Windows feature](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/install/dotnet-35-windows#enable-the-net-framework-35-in-control-panel))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
([instructions for adding .NET Framework 3.5 via enabling the Windows feature](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/install/dotnet-35-windows#enable-the-net-framework-35-in-control-panel))
```

## Install msys2

Podman requires brew -- a collection of Unix like build tools and libraries adapted for Windows. More details and

> installation instructions are available from their [home page](https://www.msys2.org/). There are also premade Github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installation instructions are available from their [home page](https://www.msys2.org/). There are also premade GitHub
```

> actions for this tool available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actions for this tool that are available.
```

## Install build dependencies

Podman requires some software from msys2 to be able to build. This can be done using msys2 shell. One can start it
from the Start menu. This documentation covers only usage of MSYS2 UCRT64 shell (msys2 shells come preconfigured for
different [environments](https://www.msys2.org/docs/environments/)).

```
$ pacman -S git make zip mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-gcc mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-go mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-python
```

> Pandoc tool installed in prior step is specific, that its installer doesn't add the tool to any PATH environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pandoc tool installed in a prior step is specific, that is the installer doesn't add the tool to any PATH environment
```

variable known to msys2, so, it has to be linked explicitly to work.

```
$ mkdir -p /usr/local/bin
$ ln -sf "/c/Program Files/Pandoc/pandoc.exe" "/usr/local/bin/pandoc.exe"
```

## Restart shell (important)

> One needs to restart msys2 shell after dependency installation before proceeding with the build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One needs to restart the [msys2](https://www.msys2.org/) shell after dependency installation before proceeding with the build.
```

## Obtain Podman source code

> One can obtain the latest source code for Podman from its github repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can obtain the latest source code for Podman from its [GitHub](https://github.com/containers/podman) repository.
```

```
$ git clone https://github.com/containers/podman.git go/src/github.com/containers/podman
```

## Build client

After completing the preparatory steps of obtaining the Podman source code and installing its dependencies, the client
can now be built.

```
$ cd go/src/github.com/containers/podman
$ make clean podman-remote-release-windows_amd64.zip
```

The complete distribution will be packaged to the `podman-remote-release-windows_amd64.zip` file. It is possible to

> unzip it and replace files in the default podman installation with the built ones to use the custom build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unzip it and replace files in the default Podman installation with the built ones to use the custom build.
```

### Build client only (for faster feedback loop)

> Building with documentation is a heavy build option. Packaging to the installer adds even more overhead. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building Podman by following this documentation can take a fair amount of time and effort. Packaging the installer adds even more overhead. If
```

> the only needed artifact is the podman binary itself it is possible to build only this one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the only needed artifact is the Podman binary itself, it is possible to build only it with this command:
```

```
$ make podman-remote
```

The binary will be located in `bin/windows/`. It could be used as drop in replacement for the installed version of
Podman.

> It is also possible to cross build for other plarforms by providing needed GOOS and GOARCH environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to cross-build for other platforms by providing GOOS and GOARCH environment variables.
```

## Build client installer

> As Windows requires more ceremony comparing to Unix like systems in how the installation happend, it is sometimes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Windows requires more effort in comparison to Unix  systems for installation procedures, it is sometimes
```

> easier to pack the changes into ready to use isntaller. To create the installer, the full client distribution in zip

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easier to pack the changes into a ready-to-use installer. To create the installer, the full client distribution in ZIP
```

> format has to be built before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
format has to be built before hand.
```

```
$ export BUILD_PODMAN_VERSION=$(test/version/version | sed 's/-.*//')
$ mkdir -p contrib/win-installer/current
$ cp podman-remote-release-windows_amd64.zip contrib/win-installer/current/
$ cd contrib/win-installer
$ powershell -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File build.ps1 $BUILD_PODMAN_VERSION dev current
```

> The installer will be located in `contrib/win-installer` folder (relative to checkout root) and will have name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installer will be located in the `contrib/win-installer` folder (relative to checkout root) and will have a name
```

> like `podman-4.5.0-dev-setup.exe`. This could be installed same way as official Podman for Windows installers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
like `podman-4.5.0-dev-setup.exe`. This could be installed in a similar manner as the official Podman for Windows installers
```

(when installing unsigned binaries is allowed on the host).

## Using the client

> To learn how to use the Podman client, refer its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn how to use the Podman client, refer to its
```
